Why do People Give Up FLOSSing? A Study of
 Contributor Disengagement in Open Source

Courtney Miller1? , David Gray Widder2 , Christian Kästner2 , and Bogdan Vasilescu2
       1
          New College of Florida, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
        courtney.miller17@ncf.edu, {dwidder, kaestner, vasilescu}@cmu.edu



        Abstract. Established contributors are the backbone of many free/libre
        open source software (FLOSS) projects. Previous research has shown
        that it is critically important for projects to retain contributors and it
        has also revealed the motivations behind why contributors choose to
        participate in FLOSS in the first place. However, there has been lim-
        ited research done on the reasons why established contributors disen-
        gage, and factors (on an individual and project level) that predict their
        disengagement. In this paper, we conduct a mixed-methods empirical
        study, combining surveys and survival modeling, to identify the reasons
        and predictive factors behind established contributor disengagement. We
        find that different groups of established contributors tend to disengage
        for different reasons; however, overall contributors most commonly cite
        some kind of transition (e.g., switching jobs or leaving academia). We
        also find that factors such as the popularity of the projects a contributor
        works on, whether they have experienced a transition, when they work,
        and how much they work are all factors that can be used to predict their
        disengagement from open source.


1     Introduction
Contributor disengagement in open source is widely known as a costly and critical
issue [9, 19, 49], as it can directly affect the sustainability of projects. For example,
in a recent study Coelho et al. reported that 41 % of failed open source projects cited
a reason involving the developer team, such as lack of interest or time of the main
contributor [9]. Such local (project-level) sustainability issues in open source can have
cascading effects on the entire ecosystem because of project interdependencies [12, 53].
So-called “core”, i.e., established, contributors are particularly critical for the sustain-
ability of open source projects [19, 57].
    There are many reasons why established contributors disengage. Some may be
unavoidable, whereas others could perhaps be prevented through interventions or by
providing better community support. Likely there are various dynamics in play, includ-
ing the role of volunteers as compared to corporate employees [44], the role of external
events such as family planning and job changes, and the role of perceived purpose,
community support, and stress. Effects might include abruptly leaving the project, but
also slow disengagement, or causing rippling frustrations through delays or cynicism.
    The goal of our research is to better understand disengagement factors and which
established contributors are at risk and when; this will enable us to build and validate a
?
    Part of this work was carried our during the author’s REU program at CMU.
2       C. Miller et al.

conceptual framework and theory. Moreover, we pursue a data-driven approach, oper-
ationalizing uncovered factors based on publicly available trace data. This way, we can
identify at-risk open source contributors and communities, and help guide resources
(e.g., volunteers, sponsors) toward projects and contributors in need, enhancing the
sustainability of the overall ecosystem.
     We identify potential disengagement factors from literature on turnover and open
source retention, cross-validate them with results from a survey among contributors
who recently stopped all open source activities on GitHub, operationalize select factors
with public trace data, and finally conduct survival modeling among a set of 206 GitHub
users to triangulate the survey results.
     Among others, we identify the degree to which contributors work outside of typ-
ical office hours and to what degree they engage in support activities as important
moderating factors. According to Claes et al. [8], 33 % of open source contributors do
not follow typical working hours, but instead work nights and weekends. Our survey
shows that contributors who work nights and weekends proportionally tend to dis-
engage for different reasons than those working regular hours. In addition, our survey
reveals that the most common reasons for complete disengagement relate to transitions
in employment, such as graduating from academia, changing employers, and changing
roles.
     To validate disengagement factors beyond our survey, we model to what degree hy-
pothesized factors—such as working hours, engagement in support activities, and team
size, which can be measured in public trace data of contributor activities—can predict
the later disengagement of those contributors. To that end, we use the quantitative
statistical method of survival modeling. As a key factor in our model, derived from
our survey results, we incorporate transitions identified from public CVs of developers.
Specifically, we analyze which contributor populations are more resilient to transitions
such as job changes.
     We find that working predominantly during office hours and experiencing a tran-
sition both increase a contributors risk of disengagement. Conversely, we find that
increased levels of activity and working on more popular projects both decrease a
contributors risk of disengagement.
     In summary, we contribute (1) a survey revealing the reasons behind contributor
disengagement; (2) a comparison between different groups of contributors; (3) measures
to differentiate between groups, which could be used to help identify at-risk groups and
better target support interventions; (4) a novel operationalization of transition data;
and (5) a survival model demonstrating which factors are able to predict contributor
disengagement.


2    Related work

Turnover. Prior work has shown that the turnover rate of a project profoundly affects its
survival probability [33, 46] and code quality [21]. Approximately 80 % of open source
projects fail due to contributor turnover related issues [46]. Even within projects that
do not outright fail, contributor turnover has a significant adverse effect on software
quality [21]. On a project level, contributor disengagement results in knowledge loss,
which is a particularly expensive issue [33].
    Employee turnover and retention have been broadly studied across many fields [31,
35]. In professional settings, early turnover research has focused often on personal char-
acteristics (e.g., ability, age) and employee satisfaction, measured with hiring tests and
                                          Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?              3

surveys, whereas later research has explored many more nuanced factors, such as labor
market (e.g., job opportunities), non-work values, and organizational commitment [31].
Research has shown that, while far from all turnover can be explained by dissatisfaction
and similar factors [38], there are positive and negative factors that can buffer against
shocks such as external job offers [6, 20]. Turnover among volunteers is less explored:
Although some research suggests that similar personal and environmental factors in-
fluence their decisions to quit [41], other researchers point out that satisfaction and
achievement, compatible working hours, training, challenging work, and role identity
may play particularly strong roles [25, 34, 50].
    Whereas reasons for joining open source [5, 24, 37, 44, 48, 54, 55] and interven-
tions to improve the onboarding experience for new developers [7, 18, 30, 52] have
been studied in depth, studies of contributor retention are rarer. Prior research has
focused primarily on testing basic attributes [11, 39, 40, 46, 49, 53, 58] . For exam-
ple, they have shown that retention is higher for contributors that have participated
longer [39, 49], contributed more code changes [11, 39], and communicated more [11].
However, there has been a limited amount of prior research has also explored more
nuanced factors, like whether a developers gender and social network effect their risk
of disengagement [43]. Using surveys, researchers further associated ratings of general
dissatisfaction and lack of community identification with higher perceived turnover and
turnover intentions [32, 56]. Zhou et al.’s case study of three projects further suggests
that commercial participation can crowd out volunteers [58].
    Long working hours, lack of sleep, and lack of recovery on weekends are often
discussed as stressors. Many studies confirm the importance of “mentally switching
off” [1, 4, 51]. In software engineering, several studies have shown the influence of
time-related factors, such as late-night commits and long working sessions being more
likely to contain bugs [17, 45], sleep deprivation reducing code quality [22], Monday
commit comments using more negative language [29], and time pressure is often seen
as an important stressor [36].
Open source practitioners reporting stress. In addition to the academic literature, open
source practitioners also spoke out about frustrations, funding concerns, stress, and
even burnout. Often, there are high expectations and copious amounts of pressure
placed on established open source contributors.
    Many stories via blog posts from maintainers who disengaged have a similar nar-
rative that describes the growing pressures and responsibilities they experienced that
lead to their disengagement. One such blog post describes how “as [my project’s] pop-
ularity rose and rose, my drive to continue to create new projects, fell. All while the
burden of supporting the needs of the massive user bases of my successful projects and
the pressure of maintaining those projects grew.” 1
    In addition to blog posts, there were also participants from the survey we ran who
explicitly cited a lack of support as a reason for their disengagement. For example
“[The open source project] is increasingly depended upon by other projects, but very few
external developers are interested/willing enough to [understand the company] let alone
contribute improvements/fixes. The support burden is a good problem to have (people
are finding [the project] useful), but it does impose a productivity (and sometimes a
motivation) burden.” (P35)
    Contributors are broadly expected to maintain their projects. Having a seemingly
never-ending list of tasks is another commonly cited reason for disengagement among
the aforementioned blog posts and survey respondents. As described in a blog post by
1
    https://www.kennethreitz.org/essays/the-reality-of-developer-burnout
4       C. Miller et al.

a now-retired developer, “working long hours for endless months” was a critical reason
for their disengagement.2


3     Overview: Mixed-Method Research
Our mixed-method empirical study follows a sequential exploratory design [14], com-
bining qualitative and quantitative analysis of survey and GitHub trace data.
    Step 1: Survey (Sec. 4). Although the turnover literature (Sec. 2) provides sev-
eral starting points for potential disengagement factors, there has been only limited
research on the actual reasons why open source contributors disengage. Therefore, we
decided to ground our research by conducting an open-ended survey among developer
who recently disengaged from all public GitHub activities. We furthermore analyze
the frequency of self-reported reasons for disengagement regarding whether different
populations disengage for different reasons.
    Step 2: Survival analysis (Sec. 5). We test to what degree the potential disen-
gagement factors identified statistically explain disengagement. To that end, we opera-
tionalize several disengagement factors, including when and what contributors worked
on as well as job transitions in historic trace data and public CVs, and use survival
modeling [42] to test their significance.


4     Self-Reported Reasons for Disengagement (Survey)
4.1    Survey Methodology
To ground our analyses, we surveyed a sample of open source contributors who recently
disengaged from all public GitHub activities, asking about their reasons.
Recently Disengaged Established Contributors. We invited open source contributors
who stopped all public activity on GitHub after being active for at least 18 month.
We identified such contributors from GHTorrent [26] trace data (version 2018-08). We
then constructed six-month panels aggregating contributions (commits and issue/pull
request events) per person, and selected those contributors who contributed at least 100
commits per six-month period for three consecutive periods, but at most 5 commits in
the following period (the five commit threshold allows for some residual activity). This
way, we identified a total of 702 contributors who disengaged (i.e., stopped contributing
publicly) within the last year and had public email addresses listed on their GitHub
profile pages.
    We specifically sampled only previously active contributors with at least 100 com-
mits per period across all of GitHub. Previous research has shown that within a single
project, there are many different kinds of contributors, with one of the most popular
models being the onion model [15]. With our threshold we target contributors who
are likely very active in at least one project, rather than more peripheral or episodic
contributors, which may have different motivations [2].
Survey Design. We designed a simple, single-question, open-ended survey, asking “Could
you help us understand your reasons for reducing your contributions to GitHub projects?”
We chose the open-ended format to avoid priming the participants to ensure organic but
relevant responses. We use the single-question format without external survey software,
2
    https://hackernoon.com/what-is-programmer-burnout-651aa48984ef
                                          Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?              5

because it reduces the barrier to participation. We invited all 702 identified candidates
and received 151 valid answers (21.5 % response rate). Our response rate is in line with
other GitHub surveys, e.g., [27].

Card Sorting Analysis. We used card sorting, a qualitative content analysis [47] method,
to analyze the survey answers. Two researchers reviewed the cards and organized them
into mutually agreed upon categories using a ground-up process resulting in 17 sub-
groups. These subgroups were then further grouped into three overarching themes:
Technical, Social, and Occupational. Note that many participants cited multiple rea-
sons, resulting in 239 reasons from 151 responses.

Quantitative Analysis. In addition to identifying common self-reported reasons for dis-
engagement from the survey responses, we additionally explore whether different pop-
ulations report different reasons. Based on the literature and reports from open source
practitioners (cf. Sec 2), we specifically investigate whether contributors (a) working
mostly “regular” office hours or (b) performing more support activities report disen-
gaging for different reasons.
    Working hours: Analyzing GitHub data, we measure what percentage of contribu-
tions are made between 7am and 7pm local time, Monday through Friday, captured as
indexWorkHours (the slightly wider interval than the traditional 9am to 5pm increases
robustness to daylight savings [8]). To detect the contributor’s local time, we adjusted
the UTC times in GHTorrent with the average time zone offset for each developer, col-
lected from a small random sample of their commits after cloning repositories locally.
We then separate our survey participants into two groups, Office Hours (more likely
paid contributors) and Nights and Weekends (more likely volunteers), based on whether
they perform more or less relative amount in the office hour window described above
than average (average indexWorkHours = 0.6; design following prior research [39]).
    Support activity: We also measured indexSupport as the percentage of support ac-
tivities among all activities, i.e., all non-commit GHTorrent events related to managing
issues and pull requests. We distinguish between High Support Work and Low Support
Work relative to the mean (indexSupport = 0.2).
    Note that given the different ways in which we aggregate the survey responses and
the relatively small sample size overall, we cannot draw sound statistical conclusions
about differences between the (sub)groups. While we report exact numbers, readers
should focus on qualitative differences.

Threats to Survey Validity. As usual for surveys, our results may be affected by a
selection bias: contributors who did not answer may have had different reasons for dis-
engaging. To identify contributors who had disengaged, we used public GitHub data,
which covers much but not all open source activities, as also visible in 10 (of 151) sur-
vey responses that indicate changing platforms. Deriving the survival model data from
survey participants enabled modeling only contributors confirmed to have disengaged.
Note that we consider moving to private repositories (12 answers) still as disengagement
from public open source activities. Furthermore, our approach to identify disengage-
ment looks for sudden disengagement (within a six-month window) and results may
not generalize to contributors who disengage more gradually. Contributors may also
deliberately or unconsciously self-censor in their answers, providing socially acceptable
reasons rather than real—a common concern in turnover research [31]. Note however,
that our survival model (discussed later) is built entirely on historic trace data rather
than self-reported answers, and thus reduces this threat.
6         C. Miller et al.

               Table 1. Self-Reported Reasons for Disengagement in Survey

    Subgroup                                         Count     Office Hrs More Support
                                                             vs Nights&We   vs Less
    Occupational reasons
    Got new job that doesn’t support FLOSS              37
    Changed role/project                                25
    Left job where they contributed to FLOSS            16
    No time: new job                                    15
    No time: existing job                               10
    Left school where they contributed to FLOSS         12
    No time: in school                                  12
    FLOSS in school, now job doesn’t support FLOSS       7
    Too much coding at work                              4
    Social reasons
    Lost interest in FLOSS                              24
    No time: personal                                   23
    Lack of peer support                                16
    No time: nondescript                                15
    Technical reasons
    Issues w GitHub or industry                         14
    Individually moved to private repos                 12
    Changed platform                                    10
    Feature complete project                             3
                                                             30   20   10   0   10   20   30   30   20   10   0   10   20   30




4.2     Results from Survey



In Table 1, we show the survey results. The most common self-reported reason for
disengagement was changing jobs to a job that does not support open source work and
occupational reasons were generally the most frequent.
    Furthermore, we observe differences across populations: Contributors who work
nights and weekends tend to disengage for different reasons than those who work dur-
ing office hours: contributors who worked nights and weekends most commonly cited
social reasons, whereas those who worked during office hours most commonly cited
occupational reasons; the largest difference is between those who cited Left job where
they contributed to OSS, with 19 % and 0 % citing it respectively.
     Next, we turn to the aggregation by type of work, noting Contributors who do
less support work tend to disengage for different reasons than those who do more: In
particular, only 67 % of the More Support Work group cited at least once Occupational
reason, compared to 72 % of the Less Support Work group. The difference between these
two groups may be because since they are less stressed when major life changes occur
(i.e., getting a new job or leaving school), they are better able to cope with transitions.
    Finally, we emphasize a surprising result. For all contributors, occupational reasons
such as major life changes (e.g., getting a new job or leaving school) were the most cited
(with 106 citations), significantly more than lacking peer support or losing interest
that are more commonly discussed in the literature. This motivated us to consider
transitions explicitly in our survival analysis below.
                                           Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?              7

5     Modeling Disengagement Factors (Survival Analysis)
5.1   Survival Model Methodology
We use survival analysis to triangulate the survey results and model the relative
strengths of the effects of the three main factors emerging from the survey analysis
on the risk of disengagement from public GitHub activity (Work Hours vs Nights and
Weekends; High Support Work vs Low Support Work ; and Job Transitions). Survival
analysis is a statistical modeling technique that specializes in time-to-event data [42],
particularly suited for modeling right censored data. In our study, the event is public
GitHub disengagement; right censorship can occur for contributors whose last recorded
event may be very close to the end of the observation period, for which it is not clear
whether they will return to contribute more. In particular, we use a Cox Proportional
Hazards regression model [13]. The estimated regression coefficients describe each vari-
able’s hazard ratio (HR), which is analogous to an odds ratio in for multiple logistic
regression analysis. Briefly, an HR > 1 indicates an increased risk of observing the
event, and an HR < 1 indicates a decreased risk, relative to a one unit change in a
predictor variable (or flipping the value, in case of binary variables), while holding all
other predictors constant.
Data. We collect GitHub data on several variables for the open source contributors
who disengaged and responded to our survey (the ‘treatment’ group), as well as for an
equal sized ‘control’ group of contributors who did not disengage. With this design, a
survival model estimates which factors are statistically useful for distinguishing groups.
    For job transition data, we collect publicly available CV data from contributors
by following links on their GitHub profiles. Since our data collection is not yet fully
automated, we can currently only assemble a dataset of moderate size, therefore we
only collected data for our our survey participants (plus the control group), because
their survey answers validate that they actually disengaged. For non-CV data, we
use GHTorrent (Sec. 4). We discard 34 participants for which we cannot find CVs
or similar information from which we can deduce past transitions, leaving us with
a dataset of 206 contributors of which 103 disengaged. By construction, both groups
contributed actively for 18 months (at least 100 commits per six-month period for three
consecutive periods; Sec. 4); the ‘control’ group contributors then remained active for
at least another six months at similar levels or higher, while the ‘treatment’ group
contributors made at most five commits in the following period, i.e., they disengaged.
Model factors and operationalization. We compute:

 – Activity level: Prior work has shown that more active contributors are less likely to
   disengage [11], hence we control for the average quarterly activity level by counting
   all activities (commits and support) per person.
 – Working hours and support: We use the two factors indexWorkHours and index-
   Support as introduced in Section 4.1 to characterize the degree of work outside
   regular working hours (more likely volunteers) and the degree of support activi-
   ties, both identified as stressors by practitioners (cf. Sec. 2). We compute dummy
   variables indicating being above or below the mean.
 – Organizational affiliation: - Previous research has shown that on a project scale,
   having an organizational affiliation can help increase developer retention rates [58].
   We test whether organizational affiliation has the same affect on engagement on an
   individual scale as it does on a project scale. Using GHTorrent, we record whether
   contributors had an Organizational Affiliation listed on their GitHub public profile.
8         C. Miller et al.

    – Team size: Turnover research regularly reveals social embedding in a team as an
      antidote to turnover [19]. We operationalize this as the number of contributors per
      project. Since a contributor may be part of multiple projects, we consider only
      their main projects (for a contributor, taking all projects with the highest number
      of contributions that together constitute at least 50 % of all contributions) and
      record the average team size among those projects. ‘Teams’ comprise everyone
      who authored at least one commit.
    – Project popularity: To control for whether contributors are more likely to disengage
      from small or very popular projects, we use the number of stars a project has on
      GitHub as a proxy for its popularity (standard measure in GitHub research [16]).
      We model popularity in addition to activity level because previous research has
      shown that the popularity of a project influences its survival probability [53], and
      we are interested in whether the popularity of a project also affects the survival
      probability of its contributors on an individual level. For contributors working
      on multiple projects, we consider the max popularity of the contributor’s active
      projects (see team size).
    – Transition found: Finally, to operationalize a contributor’s transition data, identi-
      fied as very important in our survey, we went to their linked publicly available CV
      and created a binary variable that recorded whether there was a transition present
      in the last year or not. We considered a transition to be either the stopping or
      starting of a job or educational program.

Model diagnostics. We performed the standard model diagnostics: We log transformed
variables with highly skewed distributions, as necessary, to reduce heteroscedastic-
ity [23]. We tested for multicollinearity using the variance inflation factor (VIF <
3) [10]. We also inspected Schoenfeld residual plots to graphically diagnose Cox regres-
sion modeling assumptions [28].
Threats to Model Validity. Regarding the survival model, statistical power is limited
by the small sample size, which is limited by our design of modeling only survey par-
ticipants with public CV data (due to confirming disengagement with the survey and
manual effort required, as discussed). Since our treatment group was limited to the sur-
vey respondents, our survival model also has the risk of suffering from selection bias. As
usual, our operationalization of factors in our survival model can only capture part of
the concept to be measured. While we experimented with different operationalizations
of our factors to ensure construct validity and robustness, one needs to be careful in
generalizing our results beyond our specific operationalizations.


5.2     Results from Survival Modeling
Table 2 presents the results from the two survival models created; a base model without
the novel transition found variable, and a full model with.
    The base model had a goodness of fit of R2 = 0.21. The controls behave as expected.
Total activity had a hazard rate of 0.36, meaning it decreases a contributor’s risk of
disengaging by a factor of 0.38. Similarly, contributors who work on more popular
projects are less likely to disengage (Max number of stars has a hazard ratio of 0.85).
    As predicted based on previous research, the workHours dummy affects a contrib-
utor’s risk of disengaging, having a hazard ratio of 1.56. This suggests that working
during business hours more than the average contributor increases the risk of disen-
gaging by a factor of 1.56. Surprisingly, we do not observe any statistically significant
                                                 Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?                  9

                 Table 2. Survival models for contributor disengagement.

                                              Base model                     Full model
                                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
          activity                0.36        (0.21)        29.00     0.36   (0.21)∗∗∗ 27.92∗∗∗
          orgAffiliation          0.90        (0.21)        0.27      0.92   (0.21)    0.17
          maxTeamSize             1.17        (0.08)        3.59      1.17   (0.08)    3.41
          maxNumStars             0.85        (0.05)∗∗      10.01∗∗   0.86   (0.05)∗∗
                                                                                       9.08∗∗
          highSupportWork TRUE 1.29           (0.26)        0.96      1.43   (0.27)    1.74
          workHours TRUE          1.56        (0.21)∗       4.52∗     2.20   (0.30)∗∗ 5.59∗
                                                                                   ∗∗
          jobTransition                                               2.48   (0.31)    8.15∗∗
          workHours:jobTransition                                     0.55   (0.42)
          R2                                         0.21                        0.25
          ∗∗∗
                p < 0.001, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗ p < 0.05



effects of doing more support work than average (the highSupportWork dummy), per-
haps due to our operationalization or relatively small sample size.
     The full model fits the data better (R2 = 0.25), meaning that adding in the jobTran-
sition variable helped increase the explanatory power of the model. The jobTransition
variable has a hazard ratio of 2.48, meaning, as suggested by the survey results, that
experiencing a transition significantly increases a contributor’s risk of disengagement
by a factor of 2.48.


6    Discussion and Conclusions
In this research, we have looked at the reasons why established open source contributors
disengage, using a survey with 151 responses and a survival model to quantify factors
which predict disengagement. From the grouped analysis of survey results, we learned
that the Nights and Weekends and Office Hours groups tend to cite different reasons
for their disengagement, and so do more the Less Support Work and More Support
Work groups.
     Importantly, our study shows that operationalizations of different disengagement
risk factors using publicly observable trace data are plausible. For example, since oc-
cupational reasons were the most commonly cited, we used online public CVs to oper-
ationalize the jobTransition variable; however, other commonly cited reasons from the
survey may also be operationalizable. Another commonly cited reason was ’no time,
personal circumstance’, more specifically people often cited having children or getting
married. Such circumstances may be observable on social networking platforms. This
suggest that a data-driven systems could be developed to help identify at-risk groups
on a significantly larger scale, instead of having to rely on relatively expensive survey
data. This information could be useful to different stakeholders, such as open source
foundations and other funding agencies, looking to target support interventions. Over-
all, support interventions targeted more appropriately could significantly increase the
sustainability of open source ecosystems.
     We aim to work on these extensions of the research and more, to better understand
the reasons why different kinds of established contributors disengage, since defining the
problem is the first step to solving it [3].
Acknowledgements. This work was supported through CMU’s REU in SE, NSF
(1318808, 1552944, 1717022, and 1717415), and AFRL and DARPA (FA8750-16-2-
0042). We thank our survey participants, and colleagues at CMU, especially Jim Herb-
sleb, Chris Bogart, Marat Valiev, and Sophie Rosas-Smith.
                                 References


 [1] Akira Bannai and Akiko Tamakoshi. The association between long working hours
     and health: a systematic review of epidemiological evidence. Scandinavian journal
     of work, environment & health, pages 5–18, 2014.
 [2] Ann Barcomb, Andreas Kaufmann, Dirk Riehle, Klaas-Jan Stol, and Brian
     Fitzgerald. Uncovering the periphery: A qualitative survey of episodic volun-
     teering in free/libre and open source software communities. IEEE Transactions
     on Software Engineering, 2018.
 [3] Eugene Bardach and Eric M Patashnik. A practical guide for policy analysis: The
     eightfold path to more effective problem solving. CQ press, 2015.
 [4] Carmen Binnewies, Sabine Sonnentag, and Eva J Mojza. Recovery during the
     weekend and fluctuations in weekly job performance: A week-level study exam-
     ining intra-individual relationships. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
     Psychology, 83(2):419–441, 2010.
 [5] Andrea Bonaccorsi and Cristina Rossi. Comparing motivations of individual pro-
     grammers and firms to take part in the open source movement: From community
     to business. Knowledge, Technology & Policy, 18(4):40–64, 2006.
 [6] James P Burton, Brooks C Holtom, Chris J Sablynski, Terence R Mitchell, and
     Thomas W Lee. The buffering effects of job embeddedness on negative shocks.
     Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76(1):42–51, 2010.
 [7] Gerardo Canfora, Massimiliano Di Penta, Rocco Oliveto, and Sebastiano
     Panichella. Who is going to mentor newcomers in open source projects? In Proc.
     Int’l Symposium Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), page 44, New York,
     2012. ACM Press.
 [8] Maëlick Claes, Mika V Mäntylä, Miikka Kuutila, and Bram Adams. Do program-
     mers work at night or during the weekend? In ICSE, pages 705–715. ACM, 2018.
 [9] Jailton Coelho and Marco Tulio Valente. Why modern open source projects fail.
     In ESEC/FSE, pages 186–196. ACM, 2017.
[10] Patricia Cohen, Stephen G West, and Leona S Aiken. Applied multiple regres-
     sion/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Psychology Press, 2014.
[11] Eleni Constantinou and Tom Mens. An empirical comparison of developer reten-
     tion in the rubygems and npm software ecosystems. Innovations in Systems and
     Software Engineering, 13(2-3):101–115, 2017.
[12] Eleni Constantinou and Tom Mens. Socio-technical evolution of the Ruby ecosys-
     tem in GitHub. In SANER, pages 34–44. IEEE, 2017.
[13] David Roxbee Cox. Analysis of survival data. Routledge, 2018.
[14] John W Creswell and Vicki L Plano Clark. Designing and conducting mixed
     methods research. Wiley Online Library, 2007.
[15] Kevin Crowston, Hala Annabi, James Howison, and Chengetai Masango. Effective
     work practices for software engineering: free/libre open source software develop-
     ment. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM workshop on Interdisciplinary software
     engineering research, pages 18–26. ACM, 2004.
[16] Laura Dabbish, Colleen Stuart, Jason Tsay, and Jim Herbsleb. Social coding in
     github: transparency and collaboration in an open software repository. In Proceed-
     ings of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported cooperative work, pages
     1277–1286. ACM, 2012.
                                          Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?             11

[17] Jon Eyolfson, Lin Tan, and Patrick Lam. Do time of day and developer experience
     affect commit bugginess? In Proceedings of the 8th Working Conference on Mining
     Software Repositories, pages 153–162. ACM, 2011.
[18] Fabian Fagerholm, Alejandro Sanchez Guinea, Jay Borenstein, and Jürgen Münch.
     Onboarding in open source projects. IEEE Software, 31(6):54–61, 2014.
[19] Yulin Fang and Derrick Neufeld. Understanding sustained participation in open
     source software projects. Journal of Management Information Systems, 25(4):9–
     50, 2009.
[20] Daniel C Feldman and Thomas WH Ng. Careers: Mobility, embeddedness, and
     success. Journal of management, 33(3):350–377, 2007.
[21] Matthieu Foucault, Marc Palyart, Xavier Blanc, Gail C Murphy, and Jean-Rémy
     Falleri. Impact of developer turnover on quality in open-source software. In
     ESEC/FSE, pages 829–841. ACM, 2015.
[22] Davide Fucci, Giuseppe Scanniello, Simone Romano, and Natalia Juristo. Need for
     sleep: the impact of a night of sleep deprivation on novice developers’ performance.
     IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2018.
[23] Andrew Gelman and Jennifer Hill. Data analysis using regression and multi-
     level/hierarchical models. Cambridge university press, 2006.
[24] Rishab A Ghosh, Ruediger Glott, Bernhard Krieger, and Gregorio Robles.
     Free/libre and open source software: Survey and study – part 4: Survey of de-
     velopers. Technical report, International Institute of Informatics, University of
     Maastricht, Maastricht, 2002.
[25] Benjamin Gidron. Predictors of retention and turnover among service volunteer
     workers. Journal of Social Service Research, 8(1):1–16, 1985.
[26] Georgios Gousios. The GHTorent dataset and tool suite. In MSR, pages 233–236.
     IEEE, 2013.
[27] Georgios Gousios, Andy Zaidman, Margaret-Anne Storey, and Arie Van Deursen.
     Work practices and challenges in pull-based development: the integrator’s per-
     spective. In ICSE, pages 358–368. IEEE, 2015.
[28] Patricia M Grambsch and Terry M Therneau. Proportional hazards tests and
     diagnostics based on weighted residuals. Biometrika, 81(3):515–526, 1994.
[29] Emitza Guzman, David Azócar, and Yang Li. Sentiment analysis of commit com-
     ments in github: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the 11th Working Confer-
     ence on Mining Software Repositories, pages 352–355. ACM, 2014.
[30] Christoph Hannebauer and Volker Gruhn. On the relationship between newcomer
     motivations and contribution barriers in open source projects. In Proc. Int’l Sym-
     posium on Open Collaboration, OpenSym ’17, pages 2:1–2:10, New York, NY,
     USA, 2017. ACM.
[31] Peter W Hom, Thomas W Lee, Jason D Shaw, and John P Hausknecht. One
     hundred years of employee turnover theory and research. Journal of Applied Psy-
     chology, 102(3):530, 2017.
[32] Dirk Homscheid and Mario Schaarschmidt. Between organization and community:
     Investigating turnover intention factors of firm-sponsored open source software
     developers. In Proc. Conf. Web Science (WebSci), pages 336–337, New York, NY,
     USA, 2016. ACM.
[33] Daniel Izquierdo-Cortazar et al. Using software archaeology to measure knowledge
     loss in software projects due to developer turnover. In HICSS, pages 1–10. IEEE,
     2009.
[34] Irma Browne Jamison. Turnover and retention among volunteers in human service
     agencies. Review of Public Personnel Administration, 23(2):114–132, 2003.
12      C. Miller et al.

[35] Hyosu Kim and Dennis Kao. A meta-analysis of turnover intention predictors
     among us child welfare workers. Children and Youth Services Review, 47:214–223,
     2014.
[36] Miikka Kuutila, Mika V Mäntylä, Maëlick Claes, and Marko Elovainio. Review-
     ing literature on time pressure in software engineering and related professions:
     Computer assisted interdisciplinary literature review. In Emotion Awareness in
     Software Engineering (SEmotion), 2017 IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop
     on, pages 54–59. IEEE, 2017.
[37] Karim Lakhani and Robert G Wolf. Why hackers do what they do: Understanding
     motivation and effort in free/open source software projects. Technical report, MIT
     Sloan working paper, 2003.
[38] Thomas W Lee and Terence R Mitchell. An alternative approach: The unfolding
     model of voluntary employee turnover. Academy of Management Review, 19(1):51–
     89, 1994.
[39] Bin Lin, Gregorio Robles, and Alexander Serebrenik. Developer turnover in global,
     industrial open source projects: Insights from applying survival analysis. In Global
     Software Engineering (ICGSE), 2017 IEEE 12th International Conference on,
     pages 66–75. IEEE, 2017.
[40] Vishal Midha and Prashant Palvia. Retention and quality in open source software
     projects. AMCIS 2007 Proceedings, page 25, 2007.
[41] Lynn E Miller, Gary N Powell, and Joseph Seltzer. Determinants of turnover
     among volunteers. Human Relations, 43(9):901–917, 1990.
[42] Rupert G Miller Jr. Survival analysis, volume 66. Wiley, 2011.
[43] Huilian Sophie Qiu, Alexander Nolte, Anita Brown, Alexander Serebrenik, and
     Bogdan Vasilescu. Going farther together: The impact of social capital on sus-
     tained participation in open source. In International Conference on Software
     Engineering, ICSE. IEEE, 2019.
[44] Jeffrey A Roberts, Il-Horn Hann, and Sandra A Slaughter. Understanding the
     motivations, participation, and performance of open source software developers:
     A longitudinal study of the Apache projects. Management Science, 52(7):984–999,
     2006.
[45] Ariel Rodriguez, Fumiya Tanaka, and Yasutaka Kamei. Empirical study on the
     relationship between developers working habits and efficiency. In Proc. Conf.
     Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2018.
[46] Andreas Schilling, Sven Laumer, and Tim Weitzel. Who will remain? an evaluation
     of actual person-job and person-team fit to predict developer retention in FLOSS
     projects. In HICCS, pages 3446–3455. IEEE, 2012.
[47] Margrit Schreier. Qualitative content analysis in practice. Sage Publications, 2012.
[48] Sonali K Shah. Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in open
     source software development. Management Science, 52(7):1000–1014, 2006.
[49] Pratyush N Sharma, John Hulland, and Sherae Daniel. Examining turnover
     in open source software projects using logistic hierarchical linear modeling ap-
     proach. In IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems, pages 331–337.
     Springer, 2012.
[50] Andrea Galiette Skoglund. Do not forget about your volunteers: A qualita-
     tive analysis of factors influencing volunteer turnover. Health and Social Work,
     31(3):217, 2006.
[51] Sabine Sonnentag, Carmen Binnewies, and Eva J Mojza. Staying well and engaged
     when demands are high: The role of psychological detachment. Journal of Applied
     Psychology, 95(5):965, 2010.
                                         Why do People Give Up FLOSSing?            13

[52] Igor Steinmacher, Tayana Conte, Marco Aurélio Gerosa, and David Redmiles.
     Social barriers faced by newcomers placing their first contribution in open source
     software projects. In Proc. Conf. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW),
     pages 1379–1392, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[53] Marat Valiev, Bogdan Vasilescu, and James Herbsleb. Ecosystem-level determi-
     nants of sustained activity in open-source projects: A case study of the PyPI
     ecosystem. In ESEC/FSE. ACM, 2018.
[54] Georg Von Krogh, Stefan Haefliger, Sebastian Spaeth, and Martin W Wallin.
     Carrots and rainbows: Motivation and social practice in open source software
     development. Mis Quarterly, 36(2):649–676, 2012.
[55] Joel West and Scott Gallagher. Challenges of open innovation: the paradox of
     firm investment in open-source software. R&d Management, 36(3):319–331, 2006.
[56] Yiqing Yu, Alexander Benlian, and Thomas Hess. An empirical study of volunteer
     members’ perceived turnover in open source software projects. In Proc. Hawaii
     Int’l Conf. System Sciences (HICSS), pages 3396–3405. IEEE, 2012.
[57] Minghui Zhou and Audris Mockus. Developer fluency: Achieving true mastery in
     software projects. In ESEC/FSE, pages 137–146. ACM, 2010.
[58] Minghui Zhou, Audris Mockus, Xiujuan Ma, Lu Zhang, and Hong Mei. Inflow
     and retention in OSS communities with commercial involvement: A case study of
     three hybrid projects. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. (TOSEM), 25(2):13,
     2016.
