Journal Pre-proof
                                                                                                 2022   volume 16   issue 1




Title: Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers’ Sentiments in Commit Logs: Insights from Ap-
plying Sentiment Analysis

Author(s): Rajdeep Kaur and Kuljit Kaur Chahal and Munish Saini

DOI: 10.37190/e-Inf220102

To appear in: e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal (EISEJ)

Received date:                               16 June 2021
Revised date:                                10 September 2021
Accepted date:                               23 September 2021
Published (as a Journal Pre-proof) date:     15 December 2021

Please cite this article as: R. Kaur, K.K. Chahal, and M. Saini, “Analysis of factors influencing
developers’ sentiments in commit logs: Insights from applying sentiment analysis,” e-Informatica
Software Engineering Journal, Vol. 16, No. 1, Dec. 2022, p. 220102, available online: 15 December
2021. [Online]. https://www.e-informatyka.pl/attach/e-Informatica_-_Volume_16/eInformatica
2022Art02.pdf

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the
addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive
version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it
is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article.
Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the
content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.




©2022 The Authors. Published by Wrocław University of Science and Technology Publishing House.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license international published by open access, no
authorship fees, blind peer-reviewed e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal (EISEJ).
 e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, DOI 10.37190/e-Inf220102                                                1




           Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers’
           Sentiments in Commit Logs: Insights from
                 Applying Sentiment Analysis


   ∗∗
                 ∗




                                                             W
                           Rajdeep Kaur∗ , Kuljit Kaur Chahal∗ , Munish Saini∗∗
                Department of Computer Science, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India
        Department of Computer Engineering and Technology, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India
            rajdeep.rsh@gndu.ac.in, kuljitchahal.cse@gndu.ac.in, munish.cet@gndu.ac.in

                                                       Abstract
        Background: In the open source software paradigm, software development depends upon efforts




EV
        of volunteer members that are geographically dispersed and collaborate with each other over the
        Internet. Communication artifacts like mailing lists, forums, and issue tracking systems are used
        by developers for communication. The way they express themselves through these communication
        channels greatly influences their productivity, efficiency of development activities, and survival of
        the project as well. Therefore, it is essential to understand affective state of developers’ contributions
        to make software engineering more effective.
        Aim: This study examined commit logs of seven GitHub projects to analyze developers’ sentiments.
        This study also investigated the relationship of developers’ sentiments in commit logs with team




  IE
        size of project, type of change activity, and contribution volume.
        Method: Sentiments of developers are calculated using SentiStrength-SE tool that is specialized
        in software engineering domain.
        Results: Our findings revealed that the majority of sentiments conveyed by developers in commit
        logs were neutral. Furthermore, we found that team size, change activity, and commit contribution
        volume influenced sentiments conveyed in commit logs.
        Conclusion: Our findings will help project managers to better understand developer sentiments
        while performing different software development tasks/activities. It will be beneficial in improving
        developer productivity and retention.
        Keywords: human factors in software development teams, software developer, developers’
        sentiment, sentiment analysis, commit logs, developer activity type, and team size




PR
 1. Introduction

 Sentiments of software developers greatly influence the quality and productivity of developed
 software [1]. Prior studies confirm that emotions impact task quality, productivity, creativity, group
 rapport, and job satisfaction [2]. Due to advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and
 significance of human computer interaction, research associated with sentiments and emotional
 aspects of software developers’ communication is gaining more traction in the software engineering
 domain.
     Sentiment analysis is an opinion mining method used to identify people’s sentiments, views,
 evaluations, feelings, attitudes, and appraisals about products, organizations, services, topics, events,
 issues, individuals, and their attributes [3]. It is basically used to classify opinion in written text

 © 2022 The Authors. Published by Wrocław University of Science and Technology Publishing House.
 This is an open access article under the CC BY   license international.
 Submitted: 16 June 2021; Revised: 10 September 2021; Accepted: 23 September 2021; Available online: 15 December 2021
2                                                                                    Rajdeep Kaur et al.


into positive, negative, and neutral. Sentiment analysis was first introduced by Liu, B [3]. Originally,
sentiment analysis was used to detect the polarity of small text posted in product reviews, movie
reviews, tweets, and microblogs [4]. In recent times, this technique is widely adopted by software
engineering community and applied to various software artifacts like commit logs [4–7], mailing
lists messages [8], issue comments [9, 10], code reviews [11], bug reports [12]. In order to better
support developers during software development activities and understanding the social factors that
affect productivity and retention, it is necessary to understand their sentiment in various software
development tasks. This information may help managers of OSS software projects to better support
developers with tools during software development and resolve the issues related to various tasks.
Thus, it will help in improving developers’ productivity as well as retention.




conduct this research work.
                                                       W
    In the present field of study, we observed significant work done by different researchers to examine
developers’ sentiments in commit messages of OSS (Open Source Software) [4–7], etc. However
to the best of our knowledge, none of them analyzed the relationship of type of change activity
performed by developers, their commit contribution, and team size of a project (Large, Medium,
and Small) with sentiments expressed by developers in commit logs. Our work also looks into the
evolution of sentiments with respect to time. Thus lack of research in the domain motivated us to

    In this work, we investigated the sentiments of developers conveyed in commit logs. Sinha et al.




    EV
[5] also examined the developers’ sentiments in commit logs and relate the sentiments in commit
messages with the day of week and number of changed files but our study has a different objective.
We studied the developers’ sentiments across seven well-known GitHub projects to examine the
impact of project team size on developers’ sentiments. Furthermore, type of change activity executed
by developers was considered and then analyzed the impact of Type-1 (add + modify), Type-2
(delete+modify), and Type-3 (add+delete+modify) activity on the sentiment of developers projected




      IE
in the commit logs. The existing literature reported three types of change activity viz. addition,
deletion, and modification [4]. We grouped the individual change activity into combinations of two
or three file change activities to create our own classification scheme. Apart from this, the authors
also investigated the association between commit contribution and volume of sentiment. Sentiment
volume is percentage of sentiments (positive, negative, and neutral) conveyed by individual developer
in the commit log and commit contribution size is percentage of commits made by individual
developer. Besides, our work also examined the evolution of sentiment in the project with respect to
commits that is not taken into account by Sinha et al. [5]. To achieve the aforementioned objective,
we formulated the following research questions:
RQ1: What are the overall developers’ sentiments in the commit logs?
– Developers’ inactivity in the project is associated with their negative and positive mood value




PR  [12]. Thus an understanding of developers sentiment attached to commit activity might be
    helpful for project managers in introducing measures to manage developers’ sentiments that may
    ensure the stability of developers.
RQ2: Is there any relation between sentiments and team size of a project?
– The accomplishment of the large project relies on a large number of developers and a long
    development period. Developers working with a large code base may lead to negative emotions in
    the project due to workload and stress in managing a large code base. Moreover, staffing and task
    allocation is a complex task in large projects. Thus, this makes it difficult to manage projects,
    and the decision of managers largely influences the mood of developers. Thus an understanding
    of impact of project team size can be used to effectively manage developers’ emotions in the
    project that may lead to high productivity and improved job satisfaction [13].
RQ3: Does the type of change activity performed by a developer impact their sentiments
in commit messages?
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                           3

 –   Developers who convey positive emotions while executing a particular development task might
     be more efficient and fast in accomplishing a task [14] that will reduce cost of software. Thus
     understanding developers’ sentiments attached to a particular task can be helpful in effective
     task allocation. For example, making tasks (read issues in an issue tracking system) simple to
     understand, and easy to solve by decomposing complex issues into smaller ones can improve
     developer productivity, and sentiment in commit logs.
 RQ4: Is there any relation between developer sentiment volumes and commit contribu-
 tion size?
 – Understanding emotional state of developers involved in high or low commit activity may help
     project managers to effectively distribute workload among developers and increasing development




                                                          W
     activity as well as boosting neutral or positive sentiments.
 RQ5: How has sentiment in the commit logs evolved over the period of time?
 – Analyzing the evolution of sentiments, we can identify trends in sentiment expression in commit
     logs. Is it getting negative or positive? A particular time slot when sentiments in commit logs are
     shifting direction e.g. becoming more positive, we can identify the reasons and try to maintain
     that state. For example, it has been observed in this study that reduced negativity in commit
     logs coincides with launch of the Github platform in 2008. Managers can take motivational steps
     to boost developers that may increase their retention in the project.




EV
     RQ1 aims to identify general developers’ sentiments conveyed in commit messages. RQ2 aims to
 discover the impact of team size on the sentiments expressed by developers in commit messages.
 RQ3 identifies the association between three types of changes activities (Type-1, Type-2, Type-3)
 performed by developers and their expressed sentiments. Type-1, Type-2, and Type-3 are combina-
 tions of two or more individual file change types (addition, deletion, and modification). RQ4 intends
 to ascertain the impact of developers commit contribution on sentiment volume. Sentiment volume




  IE
 is defined as a percentage of Positive, Negative, and Neutral sentiments conveyed by each developer
 in the commit log, and commit contribution is a percentage of commits made by each contributor
 in the project. RQ5 examined the evolution of sentiments with respect to the number of commits
 made by developers over the period of time.
     Our study uses the Sentistrength-SE [15] tool to detect polarity of sentiments conveyed in commit
 logs messages. This tool used lexical approach and domain dictionary and specially designed for
 software engineering text.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as following: Existing work related to current study is
 discussed in Section 2. Description of data collection methodology along with detail of sentiment
 analysis approach used to detect sentiments of developers in commit logs is presented in Section 3.
 The results of study are discussed in Section 4. Discussion is presented in Section 5. Some Threats




PR
 to Validity are described in Section 6. Conclusions along with some future directions are presented
 in Section 7.


 2. Related literature

 Many studies have been conducted by researchers and practitioners in the past to analyze the
 developers’ sentiments in OSS code repositories and related artifacts. They examined developers’
 sentiments in different software artifacts such as commit logs, commit comments, mailing list
 messages, and GitHub security debates. A summary of the related literature is presented in Table 1.
    Some researchers evaluated the performance of SE-specific sentiment analysis tools, compared
 them in terms of accuracy, and proposed techniques to improve existing sentiment analysis tools.
 Novielli et al. [16] in 2021 presented a replication study to evaluate the performance of SE-specific
4                                                                                             Rajdeep Kaur et al.

                                       Table 1. Summary of related studies
    Author and       Scenario of Motivation                      Possible Extension
    Year
    Huq et al.,      Examined the correlation between sen-       The relationship between sentiments and three
    (2020)           timents and software bugs                   types of file change activity can be explored.
    Paul et al.,     Examined the sentiments of developers       Developers’ sentiments can be explored in com-
    (2019)           in code review comments.                    mit logs messages.
    Sinha et al.,    Investigated the relation between the       Relation between different combinations of file
    (2018)           number of file changes and developers       change can be explored.
                     sentiments.
    Singh et al.,    Examined the impact of software code        The impact of commit contribution on devel-
    (2017)

    Tourani et
    al., (2014)

    Guzman et
    al.,(2014)
                     refactoring activities on the sentiments
                     of developers.
                     Explore the existence of positive and
                     negative emotions in user and developer
                     mailing lists.
                     Explored the association of emotion
                     with team geographical location and day
                     and time of the week.
                                                             W   opers’ sentiments can be explored.

                                                                 Commit logs can be explored to detect devel-
                                                                 oper sentiments and various factors influencing
                                                                 sentiments.
                                                                 Relation of sentiments with team size can be
                                                                 explored. The evolution of sentiments with re-
                                                                 spect to the number of commits over time can
                                                                 be explored.




    EV
    Garcia et al.,   Ascertain the association between emo-      The relation of commit contribution with de-
    (2013)           tions and contributor activity.             velopers’ sentiments can be explored.
    Md Rakibul       Examined the impact of project and          The impact of large, medium, and small team
    Islam    and     team size and length of commit message      size projects on the sentiments of developers
    Minhaz           on emotional states of developers.          can be explored.
    F.    Zibran,
    (2016)




      IE
    Pletea et al.,   Explored the emotional expression in se-    Commit logs messages can be analyzed to ex-
    (2014)           curity discussions by analyzing commits     plore sentiment expressed in different combi-
                     and pull request comments.                  nations of change activities.
    Khan et al.,     Analyzed the effect of emotions on          The impact of sentiments on commit contribu-
    (2010)           software developers’ debugging perfor-      tion can be investigated.
                     mance.
    Muller and       Investigated developers’ emotions and       Emotions conveyed in software artifacts such
    Fritz, (2015)    progress on change tasks by conducting      as commit log can be explored.
                     lab study.
    Graziotin et     Explored the connection between devel-      The association of sentiments with different
    al., (2014)      oper emotion and their ability to solve     file change activities can be explored.
                     analytical problems.




PR  Michal
    Wrobel,
    (2013)
               R.    Conducted a survey to investigate de-
                     velopers’ emotions in the software devel-
                     opment process and impact of emotions
                     on performance.
                                                                 Software artifacts such as commit logs can be
                                                                 examined to investigate developers’ conveyed
                                                                 emotions.
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                              5

 tools. Sun et al. [17] proposed sentence structure to improve sentiment analysis in software engineering
 text. Biswas et al. [18] in 2020, investigated the effectiveness of a customized language representation
 model known as BERT and Novielli et al. [19] assessed the performance of four SE domain specific
 tools viz. Senti4SD, SentiCR, SentiStrength-SE, and DEVA in cross-platform. M. R. Wrobel [20]
 investigated the influence of adoption of lexicons on emotion mining in SE artifacts.
     In the year 2021, Martin Obaidi and Jil Klünder [21] presented a systematic literature review
 of sentiment analysis tools designed for and applied in a software engineering context. This study
 explored sentiments analysis tools used in the software engineering field, utilized data sets, application
 areas of sentiment analysis tools, and problems faced at the time of developing such kinds of tools.
     Some researchers explored the sentiment variation based on different factors and also examined




                                                          W
 the association of sentiments with various factors. Huq et al. [22] in 2020 examined the relation
 of sentiments with software bugs. In the same year, Kaur and Chahal presented investigation of
 developers’ sentiments in commit comments [23]. In the year 2019, Paul et al. [11] analyzed the code
 review data of five open source projects to investigate the difference in expression of sentiments
 based on the gender of developers during various software development tasks. In the year 2018,
 Bharti and Singh [24] surveyed 20 software professionals to examine the developers’ sentiments
 associated with code cloning practices. Islam and Zibran [7] studied the variance in emotion in
 commit messages that are related to bug introduction and bug fixing activities. Singh et al. [5]




EV
 have analyzed the 3,171 commit messages that are related to refactoring activities to investigate
 the impact of 15 different code refactoring tasks on developers’ sentiments. This study identified
 that the developers’ sentiments are more negative during refactoring activities. Souza and Silva
 [25] examined the relationship between sentiments of developers and build breakage in a Travis CI
 (continuous integration). Sinha et al. [5] investigated the developer sentiment in the commit logs
 of GitHub projects and studied the association among developer sentiment and day of the week.




  IE
 They also examined the correlation between developer sentiment and the number of files changes
 performed by the developer in the commits. This study demonstrates that most of the sentiments
 projected by developers in the commit log were neutral. The negative sentiments are 10% higher
 than the positive and the majority of the negative sentiment was detected on Tuesday.
     Islam and Zibran [13] investigated sentiments variation based on different types of tasks executed
 by developers, development period, in different size projects, and impact of emotions on software
 artifacts (i.e., length of commit message). Garcia et al. [12] analyzed the data of the bug tracking
 system and mailing list to examine the association between emotions and contributor activity.
     Guzman et al. [4] examined commit comments of GitHub projects to investigate the relation of
 developer sentiment with the programming language used by the project, time and day of the week
 when the comment was written, team dispersal, and project approbation. This work revealed that




PR
 java projects have more negative comments. The more positive comments are detected in projects
 having distributed teams and Monday was the most negative day for sentiments.
     Tourani et al. [8] presented a study to investigate the presence of positive and negative emotions
 in user and developer mailing lists. This study found that both types of mailing lists have positive
 as well as negative sentiments and have a different focus.
     Pletea et al. [26] examined sentiments associated with security discussions in commits and pull
 requests. This study identified that negative emotions are higher in security debates in comparison
 to non-security discussions. Khan et al. [27] have analyzed the impact of emotions on the debugging
 performance of software programmers. Müller and Fritz [28] presented a study on developers’
 emotions and progress on change tasks. Graziotin et al. [29] examined the association between
 developer emotion and their ability to solve analytical problems. They found that happy software
 developers are better at solving analytical problems. In the year 2013, Wrobel [30] presented a study
 on developers’ emotions in the software development process by conducting a survey.
6                                                                                    Rajdeep Kaur et al.


    To the best of our knowledge, the work presented in the past does not explore the impact of team
size of the project, type of change activity, and commit contribution on sentiments of developers.
The work presented in this paper is motivated by Sinha et al. [5]. This study investigated the
relation of the day of week and number of changed files with developers’ sentiments. But this study
does not explore the association of combinations of change activity type and commit contribution
with developers’ sentiments. One another study presented by Guzman et al. [4] examined the
sentiments expressed by developers in commit comments and investigate their association with
different factors like time and weekday, project approval, coding language, and team geographical
distribution. But this study does not consider the team size of the project and its association with
developers’ sentiments [4]. Thus lack of research in the field motivated us to conduct this research




sentiment analysis tools/toolkits [31].
                                                      W
work. Our work examined the whole commit logs of seven GitHub projects to analyze sentiments of
software developers projected in commit logs and investigate the effect of team size, type of change
activity, and commit contribution on the developers’ sentiments. Furthermore, we also look into the
evolution of sentiments to identify how these changes across the years along with the number of
commits. We utilized the SentiStrength-SE tool to perform sentiment analysis. We selected this
tool because it is the first domain-specific tool specially designed to detect sentiments in a software
engineering context and provides better accuracy in comparison to the existing domain-independent




    EV
3. Analysis methodology

In this section, we provide a description of the dataset along with details of the approach used to
conduct sentiment analysis.




      IE
3.1. Data collection

GitHub is a popular version control and project management system that provides multiple
collaborative artifacts viz commits, issues, and pull requests to contributors [32]. We extracted the
data of seven GitHub projects. The projects were selected based on popularity, size, number of
commits, number of contributors involved, long project history (more than 10 years), and having
a valid Git (distributed version control system) repository. The projects have creation dates from
1972 to 2007. Table 2 describes the quantitative details of the projects. An overview of the selected
projects is given below.
    PostgreSQL is an open source RDBMS (relational database management system). Glibc is




PR
a GNU C library most commonly used by GNU/Linux system. Eclipse-CDT is an IDE (integrated
development environment) for developing programs in C and C++. GNUCash is accounting software
developed for individual and small businesses. WordPress is a PHP and MySQL based content
management software. Firebug is a web browser extension for Mozilla Firefox. Rhino is an open
source JavaScript implementation that is completely written in Java. Generally, scripting for end
users is implemented in java application. We accessed the repositories of the projects from GitHub1
or git2 . The Git Bash tool was utilized to clone project repositories to the local machine. The
commit logs of the projects were retrieved using the git log command. Commit logs of all selected
projects were analyzed from their beginning to till February 2019. In case of Firebug ending period
is October 2017.

    1
        https://github.com
    2
        https://git-scm.com
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                                   7

                                       Table 2. Detail description of projects

  Sr. No    Name             Project Size      Number of      Number of       Number of    Start Date   End Date
                             (In lines of      stars          commits         developers
                             code)
  1.        PostgreSQL       1,113,634         8406           66329           51           July 1996    February
                                                                                                        2019
  2.        Glibc            1,305,634         547            49216           538          January      February
                                                                                           1992         2019
  3.        Eclipse-CDT      1,498,813         141            30651           260          June 2002    February
                                                                                                        2019
  4.

  5.

  6.

  7.
            GNUCash

            WordPress

            Firebug

            Rhino
                             2,361,864

                             1,549,456

                             492,078

                             806,709
                                               1923

                                               15,135

                                               1,289

                                               2,896
                                                          W   25372

                                                              44388

                                                              13060

                                                              3903
                                                                              185

                                                                              96

                                                                              47

                                                                              82
                                                                                           November
                                                                                           1997
                                                                                           April 2003

                                                                                           August
                                                                                           2007
                                                                                           April 1999
                                                                                                        February
                                                                                                        2019
                                                                                                        February
                                                                                                        2019
                                                                                                        October
                                                                                                        2017
                                                                                                        February
                                                                                                        2019




EV
 3.2. Sentiment analysis

 There are a variety of sentiment analysis tools viz. SentiStrength [33], StafordNLP [34], and NLTK
 [35], while most of them do not focus on technical text. As these tools are designed for non-technical
 text such as movie reviews or blogs posted on social networking sites such as twitter, their results
 are erroneous for technical artifacts in the Software Engineering (SE) domain [36]. Therefore,
 domain-specific techniques provide better accuracy to detect sentiments in software engineering




  IE
 text.
     We used sentiment analysis tool SentiStrength-SE proposed by Islam and Zibran [15] to perform
 sentiment analysis on commit logs. Similar choice is made by Md Rakibul Islam and Minhaz F.
 Zibran in Software engineering domain to extract emotional score from commit messages [7]. Using
 SentiStrength as the baseline, this tool implements a lexical based approach and domain specific
 dictionary. We selected this tool because it is a first SE specific tool specially designed for Software
 Engineering to conduct sentiment analysis and it outperforms the existing domain-independent
 tools/toolkits [31]. SentiStrength-SE tokenizes the text into words and assigns a score to each
 word that conveys the underlying sentiment. The words with positive sentiment receive a score
 between +1 to +5 and words with negative score range between -1 to -5. The neutral score of
 words ranges between +1 to -1. The scoring is generated using a sentiment dictionary that includes




PR
 the predetermined polarity score of sentiment words and phrases [32]. Sentistrength-SE provides
 maximum positive and maximum negative score of each sentence. The final score of sentence is
 calculated by adding maximum positive and maximum negative score by following the approach
 used by jongjelling et al. [37]. The methodology used for sentiment analysis is illustrated in Figure 1.
     Firstly, we extracted the commit log using the git log command available in the Git Bash
 tool and saved the commit log data in CSV format. In the next step, extracted the commit
 messages and pre-processed the collected data to remove stop words, white spaces, non-alphanumeric
 symbols/characters, and punctuation marks from the text. In addition, also removed code, URLs,
 and system generated messages e.g. error messages. Then sentiment analysis is performed using
 SentiStrength-SE tool. Finally, we get the sentiment score of each commit message.
8                                                                                 Rajdeep Kaur et al.




                                                      W
                          Figure 1. Methodology used for sentiment analysis




    EV
      IE
4. Results and analysis
                               Figure 2. Sentiments across all projects




In this section, we report the results of each research question formulated in section 1.




PR
RQ1: What is the general developer sentiment in the commit logs?
    We examined a total of 86,515 commit messages of seven OSS projects to analyze developers’
sentiments in commit logs. Commit logs of all selected projects were analyzed from their beginning
until the last observation date set by this study (Refer Table 2). Results of sentiment analysis
using SentiStrength-SE are illustrated in Figure 2. Table 3 presents some examples of positive,
negative, and neutral commits from GitHub dataset. As noted in Figure 2, all projects (Eclipse-CDT,
PostgreSQL, Glibc, GNUCash, Rhino, Firebug, and WordPress) have a higher proportion of the
neutral sentiment as compared to the negative and positive ones. Eclipse-CDT has the highest neutral
(79.77%) sentiments, and lowest negative sentiments in comparison to other projects. PostgreSQL
logs have the most negative (36.03%) sentiments. The proportion of positive sentiment is the lowest
in all projects as compared to neutral and negative sentiments. WordPress logs have the highest
positive (9.77%) sentiments and Glibc has least positive sentiments (1.76%). Our findings clearly
indicate that the overall sentiments expressed in commit logs were neutral.
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                                   9

                   Table 3. Commit messages with positive, negative, and neutral sentiment
  Sentiment     Commit Message                                                                    Final
                                                                                                  Sentiment
                                                                                                  Score
                Add test case for pthread_sg etname_np                                            1
  Positive      some fixes to project description manager and build system to allow EFS hosted    2
                projects to function better
                Generic implementation of red-black binary tree It’s planned to use in several    2
                places
                Oops did inadvertent branch                                                       -2
  Negative      Bugzilla 218654 This commit shows some files contain errors This is because       -1




  Neutral
                HEAD and M5 when that is resolved



                                                          W
                they are being compiled against M4 I will rebuild against M5 shortly I did diff
                of the files and changes are exactly what I wanted They will compile against

                Oops Removing unneeded System.err.println foo
                Build/TestToolsMove WP_UnitTestCase_BaseassertPostConditions to more
                appropriate place
                New ScannerInfoProvider extension point allowing providers to be associated
                with build commands in the project description
                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                  0




EV
     Our findings clearly indicate that majority of commits in commit logs are neutral in comparison
 to negative and positive. There is lowest percentage of positive commits than negative and positive
 ones. The main reason for high neutrality in the commits may be that commits are different
 from online reviews and tweets. However, a small amount of commit messages in commit logs
 have different types of affective states than review comments posted online. People express their
 satisfaction and dissatisfaction about a product by writing reviews whereas software developers




  IE
 write commit messages when they submit their work output in the form of code in a repository. The
 submission may include some code and URLs while writing commit messages without mentioning
 any affective involvement that makes the sentiments conveyed in commits more neutral. Moreover,
 commit messages include many technical terms that do not have any sentiment manifestation.
 Therefore, it could be another reason for the neutral sentiments in commit logs. Moreover, commit
 messages include many technical terms that do not have any sentiment manifestation. Therefore, it
 could be another reason for the neutral sentiments in commit logs.
 RQ2: Is there any relation between sentiments and team size of a project?
     In this research question, our objective is to ascertain if size of the team in a project has any
 impact on sentiments expressed by developers in commit logs. We categorize the projects into large,
 medium, and small based on the number of contributors involved in each project (see Table 4) as
 recommended by Becher et al. [38]. We consider participant as developer who made at least one




PR
 commit in the project. The projects having 40 to 60 developers are classified as small, projects with
 61 to 200 developers as medium, and projects comprising more than 201 developers as large projects
 (see Table 4). Becher et al. present a study to analyze number of contributors in a random sample
 of projects included in the GNU/Linux distribution [38]. We followed the partition proposed by
 Becher et al. [38] to construct project size boundaries that are presented in Table 4 and categorize
 the projects into small, medium, and large based on these size boundaries [38]. The sentiment score
 of large, medium, and small projects is presented in Figure 3.
     As shown in Figure 3, all three categories (Large, Medium, and Small) of projects have high count
 for neutral sentiments than negative and positive sentiments. The Projects with a large number of
 contributors have more neutral sentiments (75.78%) as compared to projects having medium and
 small number of contributors. But, we see an opposite trend in projects having medium and small
 number of contributors. In projects with medium team size, the percentage of positive sentiments
10                                                                                  Rajdeep Kaur et al.

                                   Table 4. Project size boundaries
       Parameters    Minimum developers    Maximum developers     Project Name
       Small                40                             60     PostgreSQL, Firebug
       Medium               61                            200     GNUCash, WordPress, Rhino
       Large               201                             ∞      Glibc, Eclipse-CDT




                                                      W
  EV
         Figure 3. Sentiment in projects with Large, Medium, and Small number of contributor

(8.14%) expressed is higher and the percentage of negative sentiments is lower than projects with
small team size. Lastly, negative sentiment is maximum in projects with small team size.
    Due to the fluctuating number of team members in an OSS project over a period of time, it is
worthy to relate sentiments in commit logs with the number of active developers in a smaller unit




    IE
of time. For this, we identified active developers in the projects in each year of their lifetimes. To
identify active developers, observation period is chosen for each project is January 2018 whereas for
Firebug it is September 2016. Developers those show any activity after January 2018 is considered
active. In case of Firebug developers having any activity after September 2016 considered active.
Sentiments are mapped to number of active developers in each year to determine the relation of
sentiment with active developers (team size). Results are presented in Figure 4. As shown in Figure
4, findings of Eclipse-CDT, PostgreSQL, Rhino and firebug indicate that neutral sentiments are
high with large or small team. In case of negative sentiments large team indicate low negativity
whereas small team indicate high negativity in sentiments. Results of Eclipse-CDT, PostgreSQL,
Glibc, WordPress, and Firebug indicate that positive sentiments are low with large team and high
with small team. When we compared these results with Figure 3, we observed similar trend.




PR  To confirm our results, we applied Pearson Correlation between number of active developers
in each year and sentiments. The results of Pearson Correlation are presented in Table 5. In case
of Glibc, Eclipse-CDT, GNUCash, and WordPress, we found strong positive correlation (> 0.47)
between neutral sentiments and number of active developers. In Glibc, Eclipse-CDT, and WordPress,
we found strong negative correlation between number of active developers and negative sentiments.
No significant correlation is found between number of active developers and positive sentiments.
Only Wordpress shows significant correlation between number of active developers and positive
sentiments.
    Our findings clearly indicate that projects with large team size have more neutral sentiments.
One main reason for high neutrality in the sentiments may be that developers in a large team are
more formal and used many technical terms while writing commits that do not have any affective
state. Moreover large teams may have laid down some formal coding guidelines. Therefore, it makes
the sentiments more neutral. In small team size setup, projects have more negative sentiments in
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                         11




                                                          W
EV
  IE
PR                       Figure 4. Sentiments and number of active contributors
   (a) Eclipse-CDT, (b) PostgreSQL, (c) Glibc, (d) GNUCash, (e) Rhino, (f) WordPress, and (g) Firebug
12                                                                                       Rajdeep Kaur et al.

                  Table 5. Pearson co-relation between active developers and sentiment
                             Project         Positive   Negative     Neutral
                             Glibc             -.117       -.446*    .482**
                             Eclipse-CDT       .036        -.533*    .498*
                             GNUCash           -.218       -.366*    .474*
                             WordPress       -.737**     -.634**     .769**
                             Rhino             -.186          -296   .309
                             PostgreSQL        -.273         -.340   .349*
                             Firebug           .010           -278   .228

commit logs. It may be developers are less formal in a small team, or it could also be due to work




in commit messages?
                                                        W
pressure. There is need to look at it in the future work.
    Our finding confirms that projects with different team size show different trends in the sentiments.
Hence, team size of a project influences the sentiments expressed by developers in its commit logs.
RQ3: Does the type of change activity performed by a developer impact their sentiments

    In this research question, we intended to recognize the relation between type of change activity
performed by developers and sentiments expressed by them in the commit messages. There are three
types of code change activities i.e. addition, deletion, and modification [4], which can be combined




 EV
in various ways to change a program. For example, some change may require adding new code along
with modification of the existing lines of code. Based on these three types of file changes, we create
our own classification by making the following combinations of file change types: Add+Modify,
Delete+Modify, Add+Delete+Modify. The motivation for these combinations is the evidence in the
Software Engineering literature that modification of existing code is more difficult than adding new
or deleting existing code. Creating new code is fun, but changing the existing one is hard.




   IE
    We select five projects (PostgreSQL, Eclipse-CDT, Firebug, GNUCash, and WordPress) out
of seven projects based on three types of activities performed by developers. For our analysis, we
classify developers according to three types of change activities such as Type-1 (Add+Modify),
Type-2 (Delete+Modify), and Type-3 (Add+Delete+Modify) and analyze developers’ sentiments
based on the type of change performed by them.
    The results of sentiment analysis based on three types of change activities are presented in
the Figure 5. From these results, we observed that neutral sentiments have minimum occurrences
for Type-3 activity. Also this is the activity which involves the most negative sentiments. Type-2
activity indicates high neutral sentiments (see results of PostgreSQL, GNUCash, and WordPress
indicated in Figure 5) in comparison to Type-1 and Type-3 activity.
    To conclude, RQ3 results, the sentiments conveyed by developers in commit messages are




PR
influenced by the type of change activity performed by them. It shows that more negative and less
neutral expression is put with Type-3 (Add+Delete+Modify) activity. The reason for this could be
that in Type-1 and Type-2 activities developers perform two operations in each while in Type-3
activity they perform 3 operations that means more complex work and it may make the sentiments
more negative in comparison to Type-1 and Type-2. From these results, we inferred that when
developers are involved in more than two activities, they express more negative expressions in the
commit messages.
RQ4: Is there any relation between developer sentiment volume and commit contribu-
tion?
    In this research question, we want to determine the association between sentiment volume and
commit contribution. In order to achieve this goal, we analyzed developers’ sentiments in commit
logs and calculate the commit contribution of the top ten contributors. Commit contribution is
the percentage of commits made by each individual contributor in a project. We calculate the
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                   13




                                                          W
EV
  IE
PR                            Figure 5. Sentiment and type of change activity
               (a) PostgreSQL, (b) Eclipse-CDT, (c) Firebug, (d) GNUCash, and (e) Wordpres.
14                                                                                       Rajdeep Kaur et al.


commit contribution by dividing the total commits of each individual contributor by total number of
commits made in the project. Sentiment volume, formulized in the same way as commit contribution
size, is percentage of sentiments (Positive, Negative, and Neutral) conveyed by each individual
developer in the commit log. We also compute the sentiment volume of each contributor by dividing
individual contributor total sentiment (Positive, Negative, and Neutral) by total sentiments of the
project. The formulas used for calculation of commit contribution and sentiment volume are as
mentioned below:
                        CommitContribution=(T otalCommitsof IndividualContributors)
                                 (T otalN umberof CommitsintheP roject)

                                 SentimentV olume=(ContributorSentiment)
                                       (T otalSentimentintheP roject)




                                                          W
                       P ositiveSentimentV olume=(ContributorT otalP ositiveSentiment)
                                     (T otalP ositiveSentimentsof P roject)

                       N egativeSentimentV olume=(ContributorT otalN egativeSentiment)
                                     (T otalN egativeSentimentsof P roject)

                       N eutralSentimentV olume=(ContributorT otalN eutralSentiment)
                                     (T otalN eutralSentimentsof P roject)

We map sentiment volume to the commit contribution. The sentiment volume (positive, negative,
and neutral) of top ten contributors along with their commit contribution is presented in Figure




 EV
6. Negative sentiment can be attributed to lead contributors in almost every project. It may be
due to the project deadlines or other challenges such as quality evaluation that core contributors
evoke more negative sentiment. It could also be due to the status in the team or control over the
project that invites negative sentiments. For some projects such as PostgreSQL, and Firebug, neutral
sentiment is clearly higher for developers with least contributions. But there is no such clear pattern
for other sentiments and for other projects. Rather, the sentiment is negative irrespective of the




   IE
contribution size. So there is no trend that indicates any relation between contribution size and
sentiment volume except that large contributors elicit more negative sentiment.
    To conclude RQ4 results, we observed that the commit contribution of the developer influences
their sentiments in the commit log. We noticed different trends in sentiments with respect to
commit contribution. In most of the projects, the developers have more negativity in sentiment
when their contribution is large and contributors with small commit contributions have a more
positive sentiment. This implies that high commit activity causes negative sentiments in the project.
    We applied Pearson Correlation to identify the correlation between commit contribution and
sentiments (positive, negative, and neutral). In WordPress and firebug, we found a strong positive
correlation (Pearson’s correlation test above 0.70) between commit contributions and the positive
sentiments whereas Eclipse-CDT has a strong negative correlation (> -0.70). The GNUcash and




PR
Rhino have a strong correlation (> 0.70) and WordPress, Glibc, PostgreSQL, and Firebug have
a very strong correlation (Pearson’s correlation test > 0.90) between commit contribution and
negative sentiments. We do not find a strong correlation between commit contribution and neutral
sentiments.
RQ5: How has sentiment in the commit logs evolved over the period of time?
    In this research question, our aim is to analyze the evolution of sentiments across time along
with the number of commits made by developers. To achieve this goal all selected projects are
considered. We group the sentiments (Positive, Negative, and Neutral) by each individual year to
show how sentiments change across years along with the number of commits made by developers.
Figure 7 shows the evolution of sentiments along with the number of commits across the years.
    There is an increase in the neutral sentiment over the period of time in all the projects, which is
a good sign for technical communication. Also, negative sentiment has decreased. Positive sentiment
has stayed at the bottom throughout with small variations. Looking at the commit activity along
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                             15




                                                          W
EV
  IE
PR                         Figure 6. Commit contribution and sentiment volume
   (a) Glibc, (b) Eclipse-CDT, (c) GNUcash, (d) WordPress, (e) PostgreSQL, (f) Rhino, and (g) Firebug
16                                                                                   Rajdeep Kaur et al.


with the sentiment evolution, it is evident that there is no relation between change in commit activity
and sentiment evolution. One can observe a high percentage of negative sentiment irrespective of
whether commit activity is high or low (as throughout in PostgreSQL and GNUCash, or Glibc from
1994 to 2009). On the other hand, negative sentiment remains low when commit activity is high in
case of Eclipse, WordPress, Firebug, and Rhino.
    Positive sentiment is the least kind of expression in the commit logs. There is more or less
interplay between negative and neutral sentiments in all the projects. When neutral sentiment
decreases, negative sentiment replaces it. So we can say developers are either negative or neutral
while expressing themselves in commit logs. It is good to see a trend of improvement in neutral
sentiment over the period of time.




5. Discussion
                                                      W
    Moreover, we also perceive that in most of the projects (PostgreSQL, WordPress, Eclipse-CDT,
Firebug, and Rhino) the sentiments seem to be more positive in the starting years as compared to
the ending years of observation. The reason for it could be that when the project is in its initial
stage, it is less complex, having few issues. But as the project progresses it becomes more complex,
more developers join the project with time and more issues need to be resolved.




 EV
In this work, we have examined 86,515 commit messages of seven well known GitHub projects
to analyze the sentiments expressed by developers in the commit logs. Our main objective was
to investigate the relation of team size, type of change activity, and commit contribution with
sentiments in the commit logs. In addition to this, we also look into the evolution of sentiment in
these projects. We found that most of the projects had high neutral sentiments in comparison to




   IE
negative and positive ones. PostgreSQL indicates more negativity (36.03%) in sentiments and most
of the negativity in the commit logs can be attributed to leading code contributors.
    The majority of the commits in the commit logs are neutral. Our findings revealed that the team
size of a project, type of change activity, and developers’ commit contribution have an impact on the
sentiment expressed in the commit logs. Furthermore, during the evolution of the project sentiments
have different trends. We noticed that the commit logs have more positive/negative and less neutral
sentiments in the initial years of the project in comparison to later years. The main reason behind
it may be that in the starting years, a project is less complex and have a small number of issues but
as the project progresses, more issues need to be resolved and large size of a team makes it a more
formal platform and developers express themselves in a neutral way. Noticing the trend in Figure
7(b) indicates that expression in the glibc project, prior to 1990, was positive. It started getting




PR
negative after that. Age or maturity of a project does not influence developer sentiment expression
in commit logs. But taking 2008 as the reference point, when Github was launched and most of
the projects might have shifted to Github then, negative sentiment has decreased over the period
of time. So it may be due to availability of the commit logs in the public domain, that sentiment
expression has become more positive.
    The study presented by Sinha [5] also examined the developers’ sentiments in the commit logs.
They identified that the majority of GitHub commits (74.74%) have neutral sentiments. As we
compare our findings of RQ1, with results presented by Sinha [5], we noticed that our work found
similar results. We observed that most of the commits in the commit log had a neutral sentiment.
To compare our results with Sinha [5], we combined the sentiment results of all observed projects
and found that in our analysis percentage of positive, negative, and neutral sentiments are 4.73%,
26.98%, 68.29% respectively. In the case of our analysis positive sentiments are 2.47% and neutral
sentiments are 6.45% less than Sinha’s study. Negative sentiments are 8.93% higher than Sinha’s
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                            17




                                                          W
EV
  IE
PR                                Figure 7. Evolution of sentiments by year
      (a) PostgreSQL, (b) Glibc, (c) GNUcash, (d) WordPress, (e) Eclipse-CDT, (f) Firebug, (g) Rhino
18                                                                                  Rajdeep Kaur et al.


study. This analysis shows that this result is very similar for a dataset different from the one
studied in this research. They started with 28,466 OSS projects but considered only 5 projects for
an in-depth sentiment analysis. So far detailed analysis, more work in this direction is required to
confirm the findings for OSS projects of different domains and different sizes.
   After this analysis, some actionable advice for the OSS community can be as follows:
– A project, large or small, should have a code of conduct mentioning the desired contribution
   quality in commit logs.
– In the issue tracking system, issues involving complex changes should be decomposed into
   multiple simple issues involving only two activities i.e. modify activity should be clubbed with
   either add or delete activity.


   point of view, in mature projects.


                                                     W
– Lead developers need to be aware of their sentiment expressions.
– Developers, looking for projects to contribute, can expect better commit logs, from sentiments




6. Threat to validity

The authors examined developers’ sentiments in subject line of commit message but body of commit




 EV
message may have different sentiments. For example, subject line may be neutral, but message body
may be negative or vice versa. This aspect is missing in this study.
     Same developer may have registered with multiple names. Multiple aliases related to same
developers is not resolved that may influence the findings.
     Moreover, the selection of the projects is biased as we included the projects having a valid Git
repository while projects hosted on other platforms like Gitlab and Bitbucket are not taken into




   IE
consideration. A subset of the research questions explored on a large Github dataset in [5] also gives
results similar to the ones obtained here. In the future, we will extend our dataset to include more
projects that are hosted on other software repositories. Furthermore, the result presented in this
study only applies to OSS projects. In RQ4, the authors included the data of the top ten developers
with very high commit activity while developers with very low commit (commit activity less than
1%) activities are not included in our analysis. In the future, we will extend our study to include
developers with low levels of contribution.
     Also combinations of file change viz. add+modify file, delete+modify file and add+delete+modify
file are considered by authors to conduct analysis whereas impact of individual file change (Add,
Delete, and Modify) is not explored. Further research is required to examine the impact of individual
file change like addition, deletion, and modification on sentiments.




PR   Another limitation of our study is that we considered only a few factors to study the impact of
developers’ sentiments while there are many other factors such as code quality, gender, project age,
and popularity that may influence sentiments expressed in the commit logs.


7. Conclusions

In this paper, the authors have analyzed the developers’ sentiments in the commit logs of OSS
projects. We examined 86,515 commit messages of the seven most popular OSS projects to analyze
the sentiments expressed by developers in the commit logs. The authors investigated the impact
of team size of the project, type of change activity (Type-1, Type-2, and Type-3) performed by
developers, and code contribution volume to the sentiments expressed in the commit logs. Moreover,
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                                19

 we analyzed the evolution of sentiments across years with respect to the number of commits made
 in each year.
     Our study reveals that the majority of projects have neutral sentiments. This indicates that
 while creating commit log messages developers are more neutral. But when we compared negative
 with positive sentiments, we found that in case of three projects, percentage of negative sentiment
 is more than 10% greater than positive in all the projects, and negative sentiment is more than 23%
 higher than positive in four projects. In this study, we perceived that sentiments in the commit
 logs are influenced by team size. Neutral expressions are high with large team size and negative
 expressions are high with small team size. The type of change activity performed by developers also
 influences their sentiments expressed in the commit logs. Type 3 activity involving all the three




                                                          W
 change actions of addition, deletion, and modification, indicates more negative sentiments and low
 neutral sentiments. Furthermore, we also noticed that contribution size also impacts the volume
 of sentiment. The developers with large commit contributions have more negativity in sentiments
 and developers having small commit contributions express more positive sentiments in commit logs.
 Besides, sentiments show different trend across years with respect to the number of commits made
 by developers. The developers have more positive sentiment in the initial years in comparison to the
 ending years. The neutral expression has increased over the period of time.
     Our study results provide an understanding regarding developers’ sentiments related to various




EV
 software development team and project related concerns such as team size, contributor role, task
 complexity, and project evolution that will be helpful for OSS community in developing strategies
 to improve developer productivity and retention.
     In the future, we intend to expand our research work by including more projects hosted on
 other platforms such as GitLab and Bitbucket. Large data sets and the complex interplay of various
 variables in this context demand to employ machine learning or deep learning techniques to identify




  IE
 the association.
     We also want to look into why expression in small teams is negative and explore it from the
 perspectives of informal interactions as well as work pressure. This study can also be extended to
 include specific type of developers, e.g. lead or occasional, to study the difference in their sentiment
 expressions in the commit logs.


 Acknowledgments

 The research work presented in this paper is sponsored by UGC, Government of India. The authors
 are appreciative of UGC to provide funding under Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship scheme to the




PR
 first author. The authors are also grateful to the Department of Computer Science, Guru Nanak
 Dev University Amritsar, and Punjab for infrastructure and scholastic aid towards the ongoing
 research.

 References
  [1] D. Graziotin and F. Fagerholm, “Happiness and the productivity of software engineers,” in Rethinking
      Productivity in Software Engineering. Springer, 2019, pp. 109–124.
  [2] M. De Choudhury and S. Counts, “Understanding affect in the workplace via social media,” in Proceedings
      of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 2013, pp. 303–316.
  [3] B. Liu et al., “Sentiment analysis and subjectivity.” Handbook of natural language processing, Vol. 2,
      No. 2010, 2010, pp. 627–666.
  [4] E. Guzman, D. Azócar, and Y. Li, “Sentiment analysis of commit comments in github: an empirical
      study,” in Proceedings of the 11th working conference on mining software repositories, 2014, pp. 352–355.
20                                                                                           Rajdeep Kaur et al.


 [5] V. Sinha, A. Lazar, and B. Sharif, “Analyzing developer sentiment in commit logs,” in Proceedings of
     the 13th international conference on mining software repositories, 2016, pp. 520–523.
 [6] N. Singh and P. Singh, “How do code refactoring activities impact software developers’ sentiments?-an
     empirical investigation into github commits,” in 2017 24th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference
     (APSEC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 648–653.
 [7] M.R. Islam and M.F. Zibran, “Sentiment analysis of software bug related commit messages,” Network,
     Vol. 740, 2018, p. 740.
 [8] P. Tourani, Y. Jiang, and B. Adams, “Monitoring sentiment in open source mailing lists: exploratory
     study on the apache ecosystem.” in CASCON, Vol. 14, 2014, pp. 34–44.
 [9] J. Ding, H. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Liu, “Entity-level sentiment analysis of issue comments,” in Proceedings
     of the 3rd International Workshop on Emotion Awareness in Software Engineering, 2018, pp. 7–13.
[10] F. Jurado and P. Rodriguez, “Sentiment analysis in monitoring software development processes: An

     pp. 82–89.



                                                           W
     exploratory case study on github’s project issues,” Journal of Systems and Software, Vol. 104, 2015,

[11] R. Paul, A. Bosu, and K.Z. Sultana, “Expressions of sentiments during code reviews: Male vs. female,” in
     2019 IEEE 26th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER).
     IEEE, 2019, pp. 26–37.
[12] D. Garcia, M.S. Zanetti, and F. Schweitzer, “The role of emotions in contributors activity: A case study
     on the gentoo community,” in 2013 International Conference on Cloud and Green Computing. IEEE,
     2013, pp. 410–417.




 EV
[13] M.R. Islam and M.F. Zibran, “Exploration and exploitation of developers’ sentimental variations in
     software engineering,” in Research Anthology on Recent Trends, Tools, and Implications of Computer
     Programming. IGI Global, 2021, pp. 1889–1910.
[14] A. Murgia, P. Tourani, B. Adams, and M. Ortu, “Do developers feel emotions? an exploratory analysis
     of emotions in software artifacts,” in Proceedings of the 11th working conference on mining software
     repositories, 2014, pp. 262–271.
[15] M.R. Islam and M.F. Zibran, “Leveraging automated sentiment analysis in software engineering,” in




   IE
     2017 IEEE/ACM 14th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2017,
     pp. 203–214.
[16] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, F. Lanubile, and A. Serebrenik, “Assessment of off-the-shelf se-specific sentiment
     analysis tools: An extended replication study,” Empirical Software Engineering, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2021,
     pp. 1–29.
[17] K. Sun, H. Gao, H. Kuang, X. Ma, G. Rong et al., “Exploiting the unique expression for improved
     sentiment analysis in software engineering text,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.13154, 2021.
[18] E. Biswas, M.E. Karabulut, L. Pollock, and K. Vijay-Shanker, “Achieving reliable sentiment analysis
     in the software engineering domain using bert,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software
     Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2020, pp. 162–173.
[19] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, D. Dongiovanni, D. Girardi, and F. Lanubile, “Can we use se-specific sentiment
     analysis tools in a cross-platform setting?” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Mining
     Software Repositories, 2020, pp. 158–168.




PR
[20] M.R. Wrobel, “The impact of lexicon adaptation on the emotion mining from software engineering
     artifacts,” IEEE Access, Vol. 8, 2020, pp. 48 742–48 751.
[21] M. Obaidi and J. Klünder, “Development and application of sentiment analysis tools in software
     engineering: A systematic literature review,” Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, 2021,
     pp. 80–89.
[22] S.F. Huq, A.Z. Sadiq, and K. Sakib, “Is developer sentiment related to software bugs: An exploratory
     study on github commits,” in 2020 IEEE 27th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution
     and Reengineering (SANER). IEEE, 2020, pp. 527–531.
[23] R. Kaur and K.K. Chahal, “Analysis of developers’ sentiments in commit comments,” in International
     Conference on Advanced Informatics for Computing Research. Springer, 2020, pp. 3–12.
[24] S. Bharti and H. Singh, “Investigating developers’ sentiments associated with software cloning prac-
     tices,” in International Conference on Advanced Informatics for Computing Research. Springer, 2018,
     pp. 397–406.
 Analysis of Factors Influencing Developers Sentiments in Commit Logs . . .                                21

 [25] R. Souza and B. Silva, “Sentiment analysis of travis ci builds,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 14th International
      Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 2017, pp. 459–462.
 [26] D. Pletea, B. Vasilescu, and A. Serebrenik, “Security and emotion: sentiment analysis of security
      discussions on github,” in Proceedings of the 11th working conference on mining software repositories,
      2014, pp. 348–351.
 [27] I.A. Khan, W.P. Brinkman, and R.M. Hierons, “Do moods affect programmers’ debug performance?”
      Cognition, Technology & Work, Vol. 13, No. 4, 2011, pp. 245–258.
 [28] S.C. Müller and T. Fritz, “Stuck and frustrated or in flow and happy: Sensing developers’ emotions and
      progress,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 1.
      IEEE, 2015, pp. 688–699.
 [29] D. Graziotin, X. Wang, and P. Abrahamsson, “Happy software developers solve problems better:
      psychological measurements in empirical software engineering,” PeerJ, Vol. 2, 2014, p. e289.




      Conference (APSEC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 514–521.
                                                          W
 [30] M.R. Wrobel, “Emotions in the software development process,” in 2013 6th International Conference on
      Human System Interactions (HSI). IEEE, 2013, pp. 518–523.
 [31] M.R. Islam and M.F. Zibran, “Sentistrength-se: Exploiting domain specificity for improved sentiment
      analysis in software engineering text,” Journal of Systems and Software, Vol. 145, 2018, pp. 125–146.
 [32] S.F. Huq, A.Z. Sadiq, and K. Sakib, “Understanding the effect of developer sentiment on fix-inducing
      changes: an exploratory study on github pull requests,” in 2019 26th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering

 [33] M. Ortu, A. Murgia, G. Destefanis, P. Tourani, R. Tonelli et al., “The emotional side of software




EV
      developers in jira,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM 13th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
      (MSR). IEEE, 2016, pp. 480–483.
 [34] M.M. Rahman, C.K. Roy, and I. Keivanloo, “Recommending insightful comments for source code using
      crowdsourced knowledge,” in 2015 IEEE 15th International Working Conference on Source Code Analysis
      and Manipulation (SCAM). IEEE, 2015, pp. 81–90.
 [35] R. Jongeling, P. Sarkar, S. Datta, and A. Serebrenik, “On negative results when using sentiment
      analysis tools for software engineering research,” Empirical Software Engineering, Vol. 22, No. 5, 2017,




  IE
      pp. 2543–2584.
 [36] F. Calefato, F. Lanubile, F. Maiorano, and N. Novielli, “Sentiment polarity detection for software
      development,” Empirical Software Engineering, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2018, pp. 1352–1382.
 [37] R. Jongeling, S. Datta, and A. Serebrenik, “Choosing your weapons: On sentiment analysis tools for
      software engineering research,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and
      Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2015, pp. 531–535.
 [38] K. Beecher, C. Boldyreff, A. Capiluppi, and S. Rank, “Evolutionary success of open source software: An
      investigation into exogenous drivers,” Electronic Communications of the EASST, 2008.




PR
